feat(lesson): Add execute python code lessons (#97)
pyOpenSci/lessons: running-code/execute-script.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(execute-script)=

> # Execute a Python script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# How to Execute a Python Script
```
I think we want to use title case for h1 titles and then sentence case for h2 --> h6

> There are two primary ways to execute a Python script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two primary ways to execute a Python script.

1. You can executive a script using the Python command in your shell. 
2. You can ......

### 1. Executive your script in your shell
```

so i'm suggesting a h3 (or h2) to describe each way to execute!

You may already be familiar with the `python` command, and that it can take the name of a Python file and execute it

```bash
python my_program.py
```

> When Python reads a file in this way, it executes all of the "top-level" commands that are not indented.

Reviewer: Can you please clarify what you mean by executing all of the top-level commands that are not indented? I'm not sure what that means. Would that mean all functions? would it not executive code within a for loop?  
```suggestion
When Python reads and executes a file using this approach, it executes all of the "top-level" commands that are not indented.  This means that any code that is written directly in the file and that is not inside a function or class will run immediately when the file is executed. Functions and classes that are called in that file as commands will also run but the functions and classes themselves will not run. 
```

Jeremy, bare with me again. I think I understand your point here, but I'm getting stuck on the "top level" commands. see if you like my changes or want to adjust?!

Author: Hmm you have it right, I was trying to call out that function and class blocks are not executed (they are turned into code objects, which is what `def` and `class` _do_ when invoked, but the code within is not executed after being made a code object). Yes, loops and contexts would be executed. This point is perhaps too distracting from the main point of the lesson.

This is similar, but not identical, to the behavior of copying this file and pasting it line-by-line into an interactive

> Python shell (or notebook cell).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python shell (or a Jupyter notebook cell).
```

```python
def report_error():
  print("An error has occured")

print("\N{Sparkles} Hello from Python \N{Sparkles}")
```

> Note that only one line is printed when this script is run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that only one line is printed when this script is run. The `report_error` function only runs if you call it directly in the file. 
```

```bash
my_program.py
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
```

> The other way a Python script may be executed is to associate the file with a launch command. The way in which

Reviewer: Ok let's reorganize this section just a bit. 
```suggestion
### 2. Associate the file with a launch command

The other way a Python script may be executed is to associate the file with a launch command. The way in which
```

this association is done depends on what operating system you are running.

> ## Non-Windows executables

Reviewer: Then these can be h3 or h4 depending on how we want to organize!  but they become subsections of the "two ways to execute" 

```suggestion
###  MAC / Linux / Non-Windows executables
```

> On Linux or Mac systems, the Python file can itself be turned into a command. By adding a [shebang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix))

Reviewer: I'm learning so much here!! thank you!

as the first line in any Python file, and by giving the file [executable permissions](https://docs.python.org/3/using/unix.html#miscellaneous) the
file can be directly invoked without a `python` command.

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python
# The above line is a shebang, and can take the place of typing python on the command line
# This comment is below, because shebangs must be the first line!

def shiny_hello():
    print("\N{Sparkles} Hello from Python \N{Sparkles}")

shiny_hello()
```

```bash
my_program.py
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
```

:::{tip}
Shebangs are a feature of [POSIX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX). POSIX represents some level of compatibility between systems.
Linux, macOS, all BSDs, and many other operating systems are fully- or mostly-POSIX compliant.

Windows is not natively POSIX compliant. However, some "modes" inside of Windows are, such as [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about)
(Windows Subsystem for Linux), gitbash, or some VSCode terminals.
:::

> ## Windows executables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Executing Python code on Windows
```

If your Windows machine has Python registered as the default application associated with `.py` files, then any Python
scripts can be run as commands. However, only one Python can be registered at a time, so all Python scripts run this
way will use the same Python environment.

Additionally, most Windows Python installs come with the [Python Launcher](https://docs.python.org/3/using/windows.html#python-launcher-for-windows)
which, in addition to allowing specifying the version of Python to run, can also read shebang lines and emulate some of that behavior.
This allows for shebang lines to be re-used between Linux, macOS, and Windows systems. However, on Windows the command must still
be prefaced with another command (`py`).

```bash
py my_program.py
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
```

:::{tip}

> While all Python files should end in a `.py`, this naming is necessary for Windows to associate a script with Python, as opposed
> to Linux where `.py` is a convention and the shebang associates the file with Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Python files should end in a `.py`. The `.py` is required for Windows to associate a script with Python. In comparison, on Linux and Mac machines, `.py` is a recommended best practice; the shebang (`!`) associates the file with Python.

 For simplicity and reproducibility, which ensures that your code runs consistently across machines, you should always just include the `.py` extension in your Python files~
```

> Also, although there is no in-source format that can tell Windows what to do with a Python file, executing a
> Python file with a shebang on Windows also does not cause any issues. Python just sees the whole line as
> a comment and ignores it!
> 
> Because of these differences it is best practice to use both a shebang and `.py` for all Python scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Windows doesn’t rely on a shebang (`#!`) to determine how to execute a Python file; instead, it treats the shebang line in a Python file as a comment and ignores it. However, including a shebang in your script doesn’t cause any issues on Windows because Python just reads the line as
a comment and ignores it!

Because of these differences between Mac/Linux and Windows, it is best practice to use both a shebang in your .py files and to add the `.py` extension for all Python scripts.
```

:::

## Executable comparisons

> ### Pros of passing a file to `python`:
> - don't need execute permissions
> - works on every system
> - explicit about what you expect to happen
> 
> ### Pros of inserting a shebang to the file:
> - file is associated with specific python
>   - don't have to remember which
> - don't have to use the `python` command
>   - don't have to even remember it is a Python script
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pros of passing a file to `python`:

-  It's safe: You don't need to execute permissions
- It's reproducible: This approach work the same way on every system
- You are being explicit about what you want to happen

### Pros of inserting a shebang into your Python file:

- The file is associated with a specific Python installation (the installation associated with your currently active environment).
- You don't have to remember which Python you want to run as it will default to your current, active Python.
- You don't have to use the `python` command when calling the file
- You don't even have to remember that you are calling a Python script

```

Reviewer: Jeremy, I'm unsure about some of the above. What do you mean that you don't have to remember you are calling a Python script? What do you mean by "remember"?

Author: I like the changes to the first section, but I think I need to work on the second section. The Pro of the shebang is that it _doesn't_ have to be the currently active Python.
That might sound odd, but it means you can execute a command where the shebang is like `#!/usr/local/bin/python` (which might be the system python, let's say version 3.11) even while inside of an active virtual environment that is _not_ meant to handle that code (say we are in a 2.7 venv 😬 )

## Separating script from import behavior

Sometimes a Python file that is useful to execute is also useful to import. You may want to use `shiny_hello`
in another Python file. But right now, the `my_program.py` does all its script behavior even when it is imported. Consider

```python
import my_program

def guess_my_number():
    my_program.shiny_hello()
    print("Was your number 42?")

guess_my_number()
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
# Was your number 42?
```

> You may not have expected it to print the hello twice, but it did. This is because `my_program` is set to
> _always_ call `shiny_hello`, and now `guess_my_number` also calls it. That's two times. How can we make
> `my_program` only call `shiny_hello` when it is used as a script?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may not have expected it to print the hello twice, but it did. The line prints twice because `my_program` is designed to
_always_ call `shiny_hello`. Now `guess_my_number` also calls `shiny_hello`. 

```python
def shiny_hello():
    print("\N{Sparkles} Hello from Python \N{Sparkles}")
    
# my_program runs the shiny_hello function
shiny_hello()
```

This is why the line prints twice!  How can you make
`my_program` only call `shiny_hello` when it is run as a script?
```

Author: I think your suggestion was mis-typed?

You may have already seen the answer, without realizing what it was doing. `my_program` needs a conditional that checks if is is in "script mode" or "import mode" and that conditional is `if __name__ == "__main__":`.

> This conditional is often used at the bottom of modules, especially modules that are expected to be executed
> directly, to separate code that is intended to execute as part of a command from code that is intended to
> execute as part of an import.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This conditional is  most often included at the bottom of modules  that are expected to be executed
directly. This conditional separates code that is intended to execute as part of a command or script from code that is intended to
execute as part of an import within another script.

```

> ```python
> #!/usr/bin/env python
> # The above line is a shebang, and can take the place of typing python on the command line
> # This comment is below, because shebangs must be the first line!
> 
> def shiny_hello():
>     print("\N{Sparkles} Hello from Python \N{Sparkles}")
> 
> 
> if __name__ == "__main__":
>     shiny_hello()
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```python
#!/usr/bin/env python
# The above line is a shebang and can take the place of typing python on the command line
# This comment is below, because shebangs must be the first line!

def shiny_hello():
    print("\N{Sparkles} Hello from Python \N{Sparkles}")

# By calling shiny_hello within this conditional, it will only run when this file is run as a script. It will 
# not run if you import it into another script. 
if __name__ == "__main__":
    shiny_hello()
```
````

```bash
my_program.py
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
```

```python
import my_program

def guess_my_number():
    my_program.shiny_hello()
    print("Was your number 42?")

guess_my_number()
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
# Was your number 42?
```

> :::{note}Why did that work?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{note} Why did that work?
```

> ---

Reviewer 2: getting here after reading the `execute-package` lesson and omg i need to get better at not reading PRs in alphanumeric order and read them in semantic order lmao

    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(execute-script)=
# How to Execute a Python Script

There are two primary ways to execute a Python script.

1. You can call Python from your shell and pass in the script path
2. You can call your script directly as a command from your shell

(execute-script-pass-to-python)=
## 1. Pass your script to the Python command

The first way to execute a Python script is to use the `python` command. The `python` command takes the name of a file and executes it from your shell, like this:

```bash
python my_program.py
```

When Python reads a file using this approach, it executes each line of code from top to bottom. Lines within functions
or classes are not executed, unless that function is called or class is created outside of any other function or class definition.
This is similar, but not identical, to the behavior of copying this file and pasting it line-by-line into an interactive
Python shell (or a Jupyter notebook cell).

```python
def report_error():
  print("An error has occured")

print("\N{Sparkles} Hello from Python \N{Sparkles}")
```

> Note that only one line is printed when this script is run. The `report_error` function only runs if you call it directly in the file.
> 
> ```bash
> python my_program.py
> # ✨ Hello from Python ✨
> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
Note that only one line is printed when this script is run. 

```bash
python my_program.py
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
```

The `report_error` function only runs if you call it directly in the file:

```python
def report_error():
  print("An error has occured")

print("\N{Sparkles} Hello from Python \N{Sparkles}")
report_error()
```

```bash
python my_program.py
# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
# An error has occured
```
````

(execute-script-launch-command)=
## 2. Associate the script with a launch command

The other way a Python script may be executed is to associate the file with a launch command. The way in which
this association is done depends on what operating system you are running.

### Executing Python scripts on macOS / Linux / Non-Windows

On Linux or Mac systems, the Python file can itself be turned into a command. By adding a [shebang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix))

> as the first line in any Python file, and by giving the file [executable permissions](https://docs.python.org/3/using/unix.html#miscellaneous) the

Reviewer 2: needs a little bit more scaffolding - what is in the shebang? just a little bit more of a hint like "the shebang points to another cli program, and gives the path to the file as its first argument. the `/usr/bin/env` part does [...]. so this shebang is equivalent to `/usr/bin/env python {file_path.py}`

Author: I like this suggestion, but I came up blank myself trying to rewrite this paragraph

> file can be directly invoked without a `python` command.

Reviewer 2: maybe something also like "you don't even need to give your python script a `.py` extension if you don't want to - to make it work like any other cli command you can call from anywhere, you could name it just "my_program" and symlink it into a directory on your $PATH" but idk if that's overkill. it would give us some continuity with the scripts section of the next lesson and also let us tie into learning objectives: "why do we want to do this at all again? oh yeah to make it easier to run our code"

Reviewer 2: aha i see you discuss this below, nvm :)

# ✨ Hello from Python ✨
```

:::{tip}
All Python files should end in a `.py`. The `.py` is required for Windows to associate a script with Python. In comparison, on Linux and Mac machines, `.py` is a recommended best practice;
the shebang (`#!`) associates the script execution with Python.

Windows doesn’t rely on a shebang (`#!`) to determine how to execute a Python file. Instead, Python sees the first `#` and treats the line as a comment and ignores it!

For reproducibility, which ensures that your code runs consistently across machines, you should always include the `.py` extension and the shebang (`#!`) in your Python scripts.
:::

(execute-script-comparison)=
## Comparing passing files to Python vs the "shebang" (`#!`) execution approach

There are pros and cons of using the two approaches above to execute Python files.

### Pros of passing a file to `python`:
- It works with all files: The file path passed to Python doesn't have to end in a `.py` (not even on Windows)
- It works with more restrictive fiels: The file doesn't need execute permissions
- It's reproducible: This approach works on every system
- You are being explicit about what you expect to happen

> ### Pros of associateing your script with a launcher:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Pros of associating your script with a launcher:
```

> - The Python version used is assicated with a specific Python installation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The Python version used is associated with a specific Python installation
```
struggling with this word lol <3

> - That Python can be different that the Python installation currenlty active in a [`virtual-environment`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#create-and-use-virtual-environments)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- That Python can be different that the Python installation currently active in a [`virtual-environment`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#create-and-use-virtual-environments)
```

- You don't have to remember when using the command which Python installation the script should be associated with, or even that the script is written in Python

(execute-script-name-eq-main)=

> ## Separating script from import behavior

Reviewer 2: ya ya as said above i think this works better in the executing packages lesson since importing scripts is super fragile and ime rare

:::

(execute-script-comparison)=
## Comparing passing files to Python vs the "shebang" (`#!`) execution approach

There are pros and cons of using the two approaches above to execute Python files.

### Pros of passing a file to `python`:
- It works with all files: The file path passed to Python doesn't have to end in a `.py` (not even on Windows)
- It works with more restrictive fiels: The file doesn't need execute permissions
- It's reproducible: This approach works on every system
- You are being explicit about what you expect to happen

### Pros of associating your script with a launcher:
- The Python version used is associated with a specific Python installation
- That Python can be different that the Python installation currently active in a [`virtual-environment`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#create-and-use-virtual-environments)
- You don't have to remember when using the command which Python installation the script should be associated with, or even that the script is written in Python

(execute-script-name-eq-main)=

> ## Separating script from import behavior

Reviewer 3: Perhaps change this title or explain a bit after the title to:
Why do people use `if __name__ == __main__`

Author: I don't disagree with either of these suggestions. But I am starting to get writers block looking at this same lesson. Would be happy to see suggestions, but leaving for now as I don't have any ideas that I think would actually improve the lesson.

Reviewer 3: I think we should merge as is. We can always test this content on folks and get future feedback. Awesome work @ucodery
